---
SourceURL: https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/session/
FetchedAt: 2026-06-18T17:42:30-04:00
---

View this document as: [a single page](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b.html) | **multiple 
pages**.

*This section is normative.*

Once an authentication event has occurred, it is often desirable to allow the subscriber to 
continue using the application across multiple subsequent interactions without requiring them to 
repeat the authentication event. This is particularly the case with federation scenarios (see 
[\[SP800-63C\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63c/introduction/#introduction)) in which the 
authentication event necessarily involves the coordination of several components and parties across 
a network.

To facilitate this behavior, a *session* **MAY** be started in response to an authentication event 
and continue until it is terminated. The session **MAY** be terminated for any number of reasons, 
including an inactivity timeout or an explicit logout event. The session **MAY** be extended 
through a reauthentication event (see [Sec. 
5.2](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/session/#sessionreauthn)) in which the subscriber 
repeats some of the initial authentication process or performs a full authentication, thereby 
reestablishing the authenticated session.

Session management is preferable to the continual presentation of credentials, as the poor 
usability of continual presentation often creates incentives for workarounds (e.g., caching 
activation factors), thereby negating authentication intent and obscuring the freshness of the 
authentication event.

## Session Bindings

A session occurs between the software (i.e., the session subject) that a subscriber is running 
(e.g., browser, application, operating system) and the RP or CSP that the subscriber is accessing 
(i.e., the session host). A session secret **SHALL** be shared between the subscriber’s software 
and the accessed service. This secret binds the two ends of the session and allows the subscriber 
to continue using the service over time. The secret **SHALL** be directly presented by the 
subscriber’s software, or possession of the secret **SHALL** be proven using a cryptographic 
mechanism.

The continuity of authenticated sessions **SHALL** be based on the possession of a session secret 
that is issued by the session host at the time of authentication and optionally refreshed during 
the session. The nature of a session depends on the application, such as:

- A web browser session with a “session” cookie
- An instance of a mobile application that retains a session secret

Session secrets that are used as bearer tokens for session management **SHOULD NOT** be persistent 
(i.e., retained across a restart of the associated application or a reboot of the host device) 
because they are tied to specific sessions that a restart or reboot would end. Cookies and similar 
“remember my browser” features **SHALL NOT** be used instead of authentication except as 
provided for reauthentication at AAL2 in [Sec. 
2.2.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/session/#aal2reauth) when the inactivity limit has 
been exceeded but the time limit has not.

Some technologies (e.g., the emerging device bound session credentials specification 
[\[DBSC\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/references/#ref-dbsc)) mitigate the risk of 
theft of session secrets by using cryptographic protocols that prove the possession of a session 
secret rather than using them as bearer tokens. These technologies might additionally store and use 
these session secrets in protected keystores to reduce the risk of exfiltration by malware. Session 
secrets used with such proof of possession techniques **MAY** persist. However, RPs and CSPs 
**SHALL** ensure that the session lifetime limits described in [Sec. 
2.2.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/session/#aal2reauth) are enforced even when a 
knowledge of the session secret is demonstrated.

The secret used for session binding **SHALL** be generated by the session host in direct response 
to an authentication event. A session **SHOULD** inherit the AAL properties of the authentication 
event that triggered its creation. A session **MAY** be considered at a lower AAL than the 
authentication event but **SHALL NOT** be considered at a higher AAL than the authentication event.

The secrets used for session binding **SHALL** meet all of the following requirements:

1. Secrets are established during or immediately following authentication.
2. Secrets are established using input from an approved random bit generator, as described in [Sec. 
3.2.12](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/authenticators/#randomness), and are at least 64 
bits in length.
3. Secrets are erased or invalidated by the session subject when the subscriber logs out.
4. Secrets are either transferred from the session host to the RP or CSP via an authenticated 
protected channel or derived from keys that are established as part of establishing a valid, 
mutually authenticated protected channel.
5. Secrets will time out and are not accepted after the times specified in [Sec. 
2.1.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal1reauth), [Sec. 
2.2.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal2reauth), and [Sec. 
2.3.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal3reauth), as appropriate for the AAL.
6. Secrets are unavailable to intermediaries between the host and the subscriber’s endpoint.

In addition, the secrets used for session binding **SHOULD** be erased on the subscriber endpoint 
when they log out or when the secret is deemed to have expired. They **SHOULD NOT** be placed in 
insecure locations (e.g., HTML5 Local Storage) due to the potential exposure of local storage to 
cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks.

Following authentication, authenticated sessions **SHALL NOT** fall back to an insecure transport 
(e.g., from https to http).

POST/PUT content **SHALL** contain a session identifier that the RP **SHALL** verify to protect 
against cross-site request forgery (CSRF).

Several mechanisms exist for managing a session over time. The following sections give different 
examples, additional requirements, and considerations for each example technology. Additional 
informative guidance is available in the Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP) 
*Session Management Cheat Sheet* 
[\[OWASP-session\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/references/#ref-OWASP-session).

Sessions **SHOULD** provide a readily accessible mechanism for subscribers to terminate (i.e., log 
off) their session when their interaction is complete. Session logoff gives the subscriber 
additional confidence and control over the security of their session, particularly if the endpoint 
might be accessible to others.

### Browser Cookies

Browser cookies are the predominant mechanism by which a session is created and tracked when a 
subscriber accesses a service. Cookies are not authenticators but are suitable as short-term 
secrets for the duration of a session.

Cookies used for session maintenance:

1. **SHALL** be tagged to be accessible only on secure (i.e., HTTPS) sessions.
2. **SHALL** be accessible to the minimum practical hostnames and paths.
3. **SHOULD** be tagged as inaccessible via JavaScript (i.e., HttpOnly).
4. **SHOULD** be tagged to expire at or soon after the session’s validity period. This 
requirement is intended to limit the accumulation of cookies but **SHALL NOT** be relied upon to 
enforce session timeouts.
5. **SHOULD** have the “\_\_Host-“ prefix and set “Path=/”.
6. **SHOULD** set “SameSite=Lax” or “SameSite=Strict”.
7. **SHOULD** contain only an opaque string (e.g., a session identifier) and **SHALL NOT** contain 
cleartext personal information.

### Access Tokens

An access token (e.g., OAuth 
[\[RFC6749\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/references/#ref-RFC6749)) is used to allow 
an application to access a set of services on a subscriber’s behalf following an authentication 
event. The RP **SHALL NOT** interpret the presence of an access token as an indicator of the 
subscriber’s presence in the absence of other signals. The access token and any associated 
refresh tokens could be valid long after the authentication session has ended and the subscriber 
has left the application.

## Reauthentication

The periodic reauthentication of sessions **SHALL** be performed to confirm the subscriber’s 
continued presence at an authenticated session (e.g., that the subscriber has not walked away 
without logging out).

Session management uses two types of timeouts. An *overall timeout* limits the duration of an 
authenticated session to a specific period following authentication or a previous reauthentication. 
An *inactivity timeout* terminates a session without activity from the subscriber for a specific 
period. For both types of timeouts, the RP **MAY** alert the subscriber that the session is about 
to be terminated and allow the subscriber to make the session active or reauthenticate as 
appropriate before the session expires. When either timeout expires, the session **SHALL** be 
terminated. Session activity **SHALL** reset the inactivity timeout, and successful 
reauthentication during a session **SHALL** reset both timeouts.

The overall and inactivity timeout expiration limits depend on several factors, including the AAL 
of the session, the environment in which the session is conducted (e.g., whether the subscriber is 
in a restricted area), the type of endpoint being used (e.g., mobile application, web-based), 
whether the endpoint is a managed device,[^1] and the nature of the application itself. The limits 
**MAY** also be extended when higher security session maintenance technologies (e.g., device-bound 
mechanisms) are used. Agencies **SHALL** establish and document the inactivity and overall time 
limits being enforced in a system security plan, such as that described in 
[\[SP800-39\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/references/#ref-SP800-39). Detailed 
requirements for each AAL are given in [Sec. 
2.1.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal1reauth), [Sec. 
2.2.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal2reauth), and [Sec. 
2.3.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/aal/#aal3reauth).

Special considerations apply to session management and reauthentication when using a federation 
protocol and IdP to authenticate at the RP, as described in 
[\[SP800-63C\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63c/introduction/#introduction). The 
federation protocol communicates an authentication event at the IdP to the RP using an assertion, 
and the RP then begins an authenticated session based on the successful validation of this 
assertion. Since the IdP and RP manage sessions separately from each other and the federation 
protocol does not connect the session management between the IdP and RP, the termination of the 
subscriber’s sessions at an IdP and RP are independent of each other. Likewise, the 
subscriber’s sessions at multiple different RPs are established and terminated independently of 
each other.

Consequently, when an RP session expires and the RP requires reauthentication, it is possible that 
the session at the IdP has not expired and that a new assertion could be generated from this 
session at the IdP without explicitly reauthenticating the subscriber. The IdP can communicate the 
time and details of the authentication event to the RP, but the RP **SHALL** be authoritative as to 
whether the reauthentication requirements have been met. [Section 4.7 of 
\[SP800-63C\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63c/GenIdP/#federation-session) provides 
additional details and requirements for session management within a federation context.

## Session Monitoring

Session monitoring (sometimes called *continuous authentication*) is the ongoing evaluation of 
session characteristics to detect possible fraud during a session. Session monitoring **MAY** be 
performed by the RP in coordination with the CSP or IdP and associated verifier as a risk reduction 
measure. When potential fraud is detected during a session, the RP **SHOULD** act in conjunction 
with the CSP, IdP, or verifier to reauthenticate, terminate the session, or notify appropriate 
support personnel. Session characteristics that **MAY** be evaluated include:

- Usage patterns, velocity, and timing
- Behavioral biometric characteristics (e.g., typing cadence)
- Device and browser characteristics (e.g., accepted languages)
- Geolocation
- IP address characteristics (e.g., whether the IP address is in a block known for abuse)

Most of these characteristics have privacy implications. Collection, the storage of expected 
subscriber characteristics, and the processing of session characteristics **SHALL** be included in 
the privacy risk assessment described in [Sec. 
7](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/privacy/#privacy).

Session monitoring **MAY** be facilitated by the use of shared signaling between the RP and CSP or 
IdP, as described in 
[\[SP800-63C\]](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-4/sp800-63b/references/#ref-SP800-63C).

[^1]: Managed devices include personal computers, laptops, mobile devices, virtual machines, or 
infrastructure components that are equipped with a management agent that allows information 
technology staff to discover, maintain, and control them.
